### Things I love about collaborative discussions
 - when someone notices a risk or opportunity I never thought of
 - when someone corrects me (saving me from future consequences)
 - when we work together to understand the problem
 - when someone explains a concept that the rest of us don't understand
 - when we can turn disagreement into two opposing alternatives
 - when we can turn two opossing alternatives into a list of open questions
 - when we can turn a list of open questions into an experiment or research task
   to find an answer
 
### Things that make me not enjoy discussions
 - false dichotomys -- when two people talk like they're disagreeing, but they haven't noticed that
   they can both be right (because they're talking about different areas of the
   problem)
 - talking about solutions before the problem is understood
 - stubborn close-mindedness -- when one person is convinced an idea is bad, so
   they're not willing to explore "what if we did &lt;idea&gt;". It's counter
   productive, because often the best way to disprove an idea is to ask "what
   would it look like if we did that thing you suggest?"
 - talking in circles -- when someone repeats their assertion instead of
   answering the other person's question. (If two people do this at the same
   time, then you have a back and forth where each person asserts their point
   without listening to the other.)

### Discussion formats
#### Classic verbal summary driven discussions

The person with the most context delivers an (often improvised) monologue
describing the issue. Folks in the group take turns asking questions or making
suggestions. An unstructured debate follows. If it goes well, after some time,
one person presents an idea that everyone agrees with (either a combination of
many people's ideas, or one person's idea which everyone is now convinced of).

When a topic is very ambiguous or very contentions (or both), I have found that
this discussion format leads to the things that make me not enjoy discussions.
In my time working at Amazon, I have been exposed to a different format for
discussions which is very effective for ambiguous/contentious topics.

#### Written narrative driven discussions

The person with the most context prepares a written document summarizing the
context, the topic, and proposed decisions. It is kept as brief as possible,
with supporting information linked or included as an appendix in case someone
wants to dig further. There is an emphasis on specific data (quotes, statistics,
summaries of official reports, etc.) which allows readers to form their own
opinions. Analysis and poetic language is kept to a minimum: this document is
not to convince, it's to clarify.

During the meeting, the document author shares the document (a printed copy if
in person, or a link to an electronic copy if meeting remotely). Each person in
the group reads the document independently. Before everyone starts reading, the
other indicates how long the group has to read. 

Once everyone has finished reading or the author asks the group to stop reading,
then they discuss. The author resists the tempation to give a verbal summary of
the document (if a summary was necessary, it should have been written in the
document). For large or very contentious documents, the author may ask for
feedback one section at a time (e.g. reviewing background and goals before
moving on to the problem; discussing problem statement before moving on to
possible solutions). For simpler documents the author may accept feedback on the
entire document all at once. In cases where every group member's opinion should
be heard, the author may ask for input from one group member at a time, rotating
through the entire group so everyone has a chance to comment. It is sometimes
helpful to use an electronic tool that allows everyone in the group to annotate
specific lines of the document with comments. For a small group, it may be
expedient to revise the document together, making changes as the group
discusses. There are many variations for how to facilitate the discussion, but
the essential part is that the author communicates in written form, and the
group discusses the content of the written document, possibly revising it in the
process.

One important aspect of this process is that the document is the decision. If a
group member doesn't like the conclusion of the document, they can give feedback
on the conclusion section and ask for it to be changed. This has an incredible
effect: the default position of the group is to have one shared view of the
problem (the document is the shared view). If someone disagrees, they need to
say what specific part of the decision they disagree with. They propose a change
so that it's something they could agree with. This naturally drives the group
towards a consensus. The uncontroversial parts of the document need not be
discussed at all, and the debate focusses on the problematic aspects. 

This works well when the group is driving towards concensus, but what if there
are several schools of thought in the group? What if opinions are diverging? In
this case, it is helpful to write down alternative views with their tradeoffs.
The group won't agree to a specific decision, but they could agree that the only
reasonable decisions are X, Y, and Z (and if you ask any individual, they'll
tell you that decision X is foolish and Y is unrealistic -- or the other way
around). Despite the controversy around the issue, the whole group can ratify
the document and establish a certain number of specific alternatives. From this
position (either in the same discussion or in a follow up discussion), the group
can consider any of the alternatives in isolation. Whereas a freeform discussion
may have people debating between X or Y or Z (and the pro-Z group is unwilling
to even consider Y), this structured discussion helps the entire group to
consider an option (even if half the group dislikes it). You're not saying
"we're doing Z", you're saying "if we did Z, what would the consequences be?".
This lets the whole group explore all the alternatives together before driving
to a decision about which should be chosen. By separating the act of exploring
alternatives from the act of selecting an alternative, the group can more
peaceably collaborate despite contension. 

#### Tradeoffs between the two approaches

Writing a document in advance is extra effort, and reading a document quietly in
a meeting is unusual. In my experience, for ambiguous or contentious topics, the
investment in the document and the adjustment to the new process pays for
itself. I've found the written narrative format can make the difference between
an awful discussion with all the aspects I dislike, and a delightful and
satisfying collaboration session. 
