A friend of mine who is earlier in their career recently asked me:

> Iâ€™ve been curious - how did you learn and improve as a software engineer?
> 
> Did you do a lot of learning outside of work?

I thought the answer might make an interesting blog post, so here it goes.

### Job choice

When looking for work, I take the job where I think I can learn the most. As an
intern, I was choosing between a full TDD shop using Ruby (my favorite language
at the time) and a software consultancy where I would be in different
organizations using different tech stacks. The Ruby job paid $5k-$10k more. I
chose the software consultancy, where I worked on C#, Excel VBA and PHP. The
later two were not glamorous tech stacks, but the projects were amazing and I
learned so much. I returned to that company after I finished my undergrad, and
continued to work in diverse tech stacks, industries, and organization sizes.
After that job, I was not afraid when someone said: "Please get this application
running. We have no documentation, no contact with anyone who wrote it, and we
don't know the database password."

### Pursuing my curiosity

The next biggest thing I can think of about learning is that I don't care about
what I "should" be learning. For example, I was never interested in networking.
I found computer architecture and compilers interesting, but networking was just
boring for me. So I didn't bother learning it directly, and just picked it up as
needs arose. On the other hand, unit testing really gets me stoked. In the Excel
VBA project as an intern, I figured unit tests would speed me up. I took four
hours to write a minimalist test runner, and started unit testing my VBA. Next
week, I took another four hours to add some missing features to the test runner.
Those eight hours were on the clock (and billed to the client) because I could
justify that it would speed me up. (I had data to show that the manual testing
what costly and error prone for me, so the 4-8 hours was mathematically
justified.) That's an example of following my curiosity, and of learning on the
job.

### Projects

Recently, I had to learn Angular at work. I've always used React or Preact when
I'm doing something that warrants a front end framework, so there are some
paradigm shifts for me. There is a specific development tool that my teammates
and I wished we had, and I could imagine how to build it in Angular. So instead
of watching YouTube videos and doing tutorials, I just built the tool I wanted
using Angular. It was slower than if I used React, but it meant I was learning
while I built it. It was easy to stay motivated, because each week in our
retrospective we noticed how badly we wanted that tool. It was also easy to
prioritize what parts of Angular I needed to learn: whatever is keeping me from
cranking out the next feature.

We now use that tool daily, and I think my code is garbage because I now know so
much more about how I should have done it. That's a great outcome: I've learned
the tech stack, produced something useful, and had fun doing it.

### Reading

There are some things that aren't well suited to project-based learning.
Architecture, design patterns, development philosophy, etc. For those things, I
read. 

Years ago, I created a Twitter account to follow authors of textbooks I liked. I
listened to tech podcasts which interviewed authors and other interesting
people, and I followed them on Twitter too. Through these channels, I would
discover new books as they are being published, and would buy physical copies.

Sometimes, I had no interest in reading text books. Then, months later, I would
get stoked about one and read it on the train for a while. In some jobs, I would
take 30 minutes in the morning to read at my desk or in the parking lot.

### Writing and publishing

I started writing on Twitter to keep a record of interesting things I was
learning. Later, I started this blog. This exercise of summarizing and
publishing something about what I'm learning has been helpful. Sometimes, I get
some feedback from someone on the internet that helps with my learning.  Every
time, the process of writing helps clarify my thinking.

It's hard to know in advance what things will turn out to be quite useful and
what things will be boring, so I try to not think too much about that and just
write about what I'm learning and what I think is interesting.

### Learning at work

I'm always on the lookout for opportunities to learn on the job. I'm looking for
situations where the fastest way forward is for me to learn. A good example of
that is the area of Domain Driven Design -- the social and technical practice of
aligning our language and code between customers, developers, and other
stakeholders. I first applied it at work by facilitating a "domain modelling"
session with myself, the other developer on the team, our manager, and two user
experience experts who had just completed some user studies related to the
product we were designing. We had a multi-day meeting scheduled for us to review
the findings and to brainstorm about the product.

As the discussion progressed, I saw an opportunity to use some of the modelling
techniques I had been reading about. I took notes on the whiteboard like I had
seen in the textbook. The notes I took helped crystalize the conversation, and
we started diagramming together on the whiteboard. The approach led to some
really critical questions that we likely would have overlooked if we were just
talking. That diagram became one of the key design documents as we went into our
development.

There have been many instances like this -- some technical, some interpersonal
-- where there is a moment of "crisis" (in the classical sense) where I see an
opportunity to suggest something that I have been learning. As much as I can, I
take the scary step in those moments to speak up and propose the idea. (Or, as
in the anecdote above, just try it out and see if folks like how it's shaping
up.) 

#### Align curiosity with business value

You can imagine a Venn diagram of things that are good for business and things
that I'm curious about. I try to work in the middle area, so my employer pays
for my curiosity. It's win-win, because when I'm pursing curiosity I work with
an intensity that no compensation could induce. A lot of my career development
has been about trying to find alignment between what innately interests me and
what someone's willing to pay for.

### Time tracking

A lot of these things require getting myself emotionally involved in my work. I
have chosen to embrace the fact that I like my work, but I'm wary that I would
make my work my life. I think often of that opening scene in Flubber when Robin
Williams' character sends a floating digital video screen to represent him at
his own wedding because he can't leave his inventor's workshop.

For my whole career, I have kept a timesheet. I use it to make sure I don't
overwork. Some days, when curiosity strikes, I work late beacuse I want to. This
is the "emotionally invested" part. But then, I make sure to take off early
later in the week. When I'm feeling nervous about leaving work early, I review
my time tracking report (and occasionally send a screenshot to my boss). "Hey,
I've already worked 42 hours this week, I'm going to take off early for the
weekend. See you Monday!"

One of the things I look for in a job is that the hours can be a bit flexible so
that I can pursue my curiosity when it strikes, and attend to the other areas of
my life at different times.

The reason I mention this as part of this post is that I have described lots of
"over and above" things I do to learn -- but it's important to know that I
offset that by being "under and below" to compensate.

### Having fun learning

The bottom line for me is that I introspect to see what I enjoy and pursue that.
I end up doing a lot of self-directed learning as a result, but it's often
driven by curiosity rather than self-discipline. I'm OK with leaving a textbook
half-ready or a hobby project unfinished. At work, when I discover that I'm not
learning much in my current role, I look to change roles (either internally or
in a new organization). When I want nothing to do with computers, I log off
early and go do the other things I enjoy instead.

